

1
© 2025 KPMG Assurance and Consulting Services LLP, an Indian Limited Liability Partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization 
of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
Point of view on Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI)
KPMG. Make the Difference.
Authentication Mechanisms For Digital 
Payment Transactions Directions, 2025
Key takeaways from the RBI directions
RBI released directions on authentication mechanisms for digital payment transactions (RBI/2025-26/79 
CO.DPSS.POLC.No. S 668/02-14-015/2025-2026 via a notification on 25 September 2025.
All digital payment transactions in India are required to 
authenticate via two factors of authentication (2FA)
1 April 2026
Is the effective date of compliance for all Payment 
System Providers and Payment System 
Participants, including banks and non-bank entities, 
unless exempted.
Principles for 2FA authentication
Minimum two factors of 
authentication
First factor – customer credentials
Second factor - “something the user 
has”, “something the user knows” or 
“something the user is”
At least one of the factors to
be dynamic
For digital payment transactions 
(excluding card present 
transactions) –   at least one factor 
should be dynamic in nature, i.e. 
unique proof of possession
Robust
Compromise of one factor should 
not affect reliability of the other
Examples of factors of authentication
•SMS based OTP
•Passphrase
•Software token
•Fingerprint
•Other biometrics -
 (device
native or Aadhaar based).
•PIN
•Card hardware
Other Key 
Requirements
Interoperability / Open 
Access – 
offer services such as 
tokenisation to all token 
requestors for all use cases 
or channels
Risk based approach – 
issuers shall also perform 
fraud risk management for 
suspicious transactions
Responsibility of the 
issuer – 
to ensure integrity of 
authentication mechanism, 
compensate customer in 
case of any loss, comply 
with DPDP Act 2023
•Contactless card small-value transactions
•E-mandates (excluding first payment)
•Prepaid instrumentslike Mobile money transfer and gift
cards
•NETC transactions like FASTag
•Travel bookings (global distribution systems)through
corporate cards
•Offline small-value digital payments
These directions are not applicable to cross-border 
digital payment transactions
However, card issuers are required to (by 1 October 
2026), to validate non-recurring, cross-border card not 
present transactions, where authentication request is 
raised by overseas merchant / acquirer
Cross-border transactions
Exceptions

The information contained herein is of a general nature and is not intended to address the circumstances of any particular individual  or entity. 
Although we endeavor to provide accurate and timely information, there can be no guarantee that such information is accurate as of the date it is 
received or that it will continue to be accurate in the future. No one should act on such information without appropriate professional advice after 
a thorough examination of the particular  situation.
The views and opinions expressed herein are those of the quoted third parties and do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of 
KPMG in India.
KPMG Assurance and Consulting Services LLP, Lodha Excelus, Apollo Mills Compound, NM Joshi Marg, Mahalaxmi, Mumbai –   400 011 
Phone: +91 22 3989 6000, Fax: +91 22 3983 6000.
© 2025 KPMG Assurance and Consulting Services LLP, an Indian Limited Liability Partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization 
of independent member firms affiliated  with KPMG International  Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
This document is for e-communication only. (FL/BRO_1125_AC)
Accessourlatestinsights
on KPMGInsightsEdge
Followuson: 
kpmg.com/in/socialmedia
KPMG in India contacts:
kpmg.com/in
Atul Gupta
Partner, Head of Function
Digital Trust and Cyber
E: atulgupta@kpmg.com
Kunal Pande 
Partner, Leader - Digital Trust & Cyber for 
FS, Co-Head - Digital Risk & Cyber 
E: kpande@kpmg.com
Rohan Padhi
Partner and Co-Lead 
Digital Risk and Cloud Security
E: rohanpadhi@kpmg.com
Akhilesh Tuteja
Global Head
Cyber Security
E: atuteja@kpmg.com
Romharsh Razdan
Partner, Lead Payment Risk and 
Co-Lead Cloud Security
E: romharsh@kpmg.com
Contributors: 
•Aakansha Gupta
•Madhuri Gangaramani